Muses of Pieria who give glory through song, come hither,
tell of Zeus your father and chant his praise. Through him mortal men
are famed or un-famed, sung or unsung alike, as great Zeus wills. For
easily he makes strong, and easily he brings the strong man low; easily
he humbles the proud and raises the obscure, and easily he straightens
the crooked and blasts the proud,—Zeus who thunders aloft and has his
dwelling most high.

Attend thou with eye and ear, and make judgements straight with
righteousness. And I, Perses, would tell of true things.

So, after all, there was not one kind of Strife alone, but
all over the earth there are two. As for the one, a man would praise
her when he came to understand her; but the other is blameworthy: and
they are wholly different in nature. For one fosters evil war and
battle, being cruel: her no man loves; but perforce, through the will
of the deathless gods, men pay harsh Strife her honour due. But the
other is the elder daughter of dark Night, and the son of Cronos who
sits above and dwells in the aether, set her in the roots of the earth:
and she is far kinder to men. She stirs up even the shiftless to toil;
for a man grows eager to work when he considers his neighbour, a rich
man who hastens to plough and plant and put his house in good order;
and neighbour vies with his neighbour as he hurries after wealth. This
Strife is wholesome for men. And potter is angry with potter, and
craftsman with craftsman, and beggar is jealous of beggar, and minstrel
of minstrel.

Perses, lay up these things in your heart, and do not let
that Strife who delights in mischief hold your heart back from work,
while you peep and peer and listen to the wrangles of the court-house.
Little concern has he with quarrels and courts who has not a year’s
victuals laid up betimes, even that which the earth bears, Demeter’s
grain. When you have got plenty of that, you can raise disputes and
strive to get another’s goods. But you shall have no second chance to
deal so again: nay, let us settle our dispute here with true judgement
divided our inheritance, but you seized the greater share and carried
it off, greatly swelling the glory of our bribe-swallowing lords who
love to judge such a cause as this. Fools! They know not how much more
the half is than the whole, nor what great advantage there is in mallow
and asphodel 

For the gods keep hidden from men the means of life. Else
you would easily do work enough in a day to supply you for a full year
even without working; soon would you put away your rudder over the
smoke, and the fields worked by ox and sturdy mule would run to waste.
But Zeus in the anger of his heart hid it, because Prometheus the
crafty deceived him; therefore he planned sorrow and mischief against
men. He hid fire; but that the noble son of Iapetus stole again for men
from Zeus the counsellor in a hollow fennel-stalk, so that Zeus who
delights in thunder did not see it. But afterwards Zeus who gathers the
clouds said to him in anger